Hello everybody. I hope this video comes as a nice welcome surprise. Welcome to AP Calculus Unit 1. Now, I want to be very, very clear here. For the past year, I covered the entire AP pre-calculus course on this channel. And I did this because it was the highest level of math I have ever taken. But now, I have received literal hundreds of comments begging for me to review this stupidly long course. So, here I am only deciding to do 10 unit review videos that are required. Just so you were aware, I have had to teach myself this course to be able to make these videos. So, all I ask is please just follow my Instagram. This took weeks to make, man, please. Anyway, this unit is worth 10 to 12% on the AB exam and 4 to 7% on the BC exam. I'll just say let's get into it already. So, I've never really made unit specific videos before, so I suppose I'll start this simply. What is calculus? It is the study of continuous change. Do you remember back in the first few topics of pre-calculus where we covered rate of change and I sounded like I was at least two wives in? Well, a lot of that rate of change stuff is similar to calculus with the same formula for rate of change over an interval and also finding rate of change at a specific point. The big focus of this unit is limits and a new thing called continuity. That means I get to split this video in half. So, welcome to the limit part of this video. You might remember we also covered limits in pre-calculus. So, why don't we zoom in on what a limit truly is? Let's take the basic graph f ofx= x. And now let's say we have the limit as x approaches 3 of f ofx. A limit is simply about approach. It is about quote getting close to a number. So on this graph as x approaches 3 on the y or f ofx we are approaching positive three. We can take this even further by taking the plus and minus limits. Remember minus is approaching from the left plus is approaching from the right. So let's see here. Approaching from the left we would be approaching three. And approaching from the right it would also be three. But this is a pretty easy example. Now let's do something like this. It is a peace-wise graph. Now let's answer the same three limit questions. The limit as x approaches three from the left is still three on the y. But as x approaches three from the right, it is five. See how these two answers are completely different. That means the limit as x approaches three without the plus or minus just like a girlfriend for me doesn't exist. This will only happen when these two are different numbers. But let me ask you a question. What does f of three equal? Now I mean yes we see two places on the y where it is but one of them is a hole where nothing exists. So the only right answer here is the filledin dot which is five. And if you had a graph like this yes the limit as x approaches two of the function would be three but f of two would be five because that is the filledin point. Now let's move away from graphs. Time to talk about a good friend of graphs called tables. In this case limits are actually pretty easy to estimate. For example, in this table, it's pretty obvious that the limit as x approaches 5 of this function will be two. And that's pretty much all I have for tables. Just remember to always round your answer to three decimal places. Um, so uh, all right. Now, I'd like to move to algebra with limits. I kind of relate this to log properties because you find there will be a lot of similarities between them and the limits. The big foundational property of limits is the limit of f ofx plus f ofx would equal the limit of f ofx plus the limit of f ofx which would just be 2 * the limit of f ofx. These evolve into many other properties that you can try and memorize if you really want to, but I'd rather just do some practice problems. Essentially, the basic thing to know is the limit of a constant is a constant. So the limit of 1 is equal to 1. And the limit as x approaches 3 of 1 billion is 1 billion. So look at this problem. The limit as x approaches 2 of f of f ofx. Remember what I said back in pre-calculus. You start from the inside and go to the outside. So as x approaches 2, f ofx or y would approach 1. So now we can fill that in. Or if you wanted to do correct notation, you can write this. Then now we need to find the y value as x approaches - 1 which is 2. So 2 is our final answer. What about this problem? The limit as x approaches 10 of 1 + 9 over 3. Solving the parenthesis we get 4. And remember the limit of a constant is a constant. So the answer is just simply four. If we were to manipulate this as being the limit as x approaches 10 of fx plus g ofx over 3 where the limit as x approaches 10 of fx= 1 and the limit as x approaches 10 of g ofx= 9. The answer would still be the same because we just be plugging in the same values. What about if you have a peace-wise function here? The way to solve it is by plugging in the limit to each problem. If they match, then that is the answer. And if they don't match, just like my girlfriend, the limit doesn't exist. So now, say we have limits but with x's in the parenthesis. If you want to solve the limit, the basic method you should always try first is direct substitution. This is where you plug in whatever x is approaching for x in the argument and solve it. A lot of times though, you'll find that sometimes this will create a zero in the denominator if it is a rational function. Obviously that is undefined. So we need to do something different. So what do we do here? Simple. We use algebra. foiling and canceling out expressions, multiplying by the conjugate, factoring, you choose really. As long as you can manipulate the function to where the denominator won't equal zero when you do direct substitution, then it really doesn't matter what you do. Obviously, if nothing works and everything you do seems to only cause a zero in the denominator, then the likely answer is that the limit just doesn't exist. Oh, and there are also these identities you can use for limits. Just remember that these are only able to be used if the limit approaches zero. Let's remember also that if the limit approaches infinity or negative infinity, we have handydandy tricks for polomial functions in my pre-calculus 1.6 video and the handydandy tricks for rational functions in my pre-calculus 1.7 video. Those videos will both be linked in the description. Now, let me introduce you to something that sounds and looks a lot more complex than it actually is. The squeeze theorem. The best way I think I can explain this is with an example. This one, the limit as x approaches 0 of x * s of 1 /x. Let's ignore the x for a second. From trigonometry, I know that a sign graph falls between the range of -1 and 1. Next, if we bring the x back, we now have to multiply the outer numbers by x. So, we get x and negx. So, now let's write them in their proper limit form, which we do by simply adding on the limit as x approaches zero to each of them. Obviously, we can't do direct substitution on the middle one because we'd get zero in the denominator. But we can do it to the outer ones. For both of them, we'd simply get zero. So here is where our squeeze theorem comes in. The idea is that these numbers are squeezing the limit in the middle. If these two numbers are the same, then simply put the answer is whatever the number is or in this case zero. If the numbers are not the same, then the squeeze theorem cannot be used to find the limit. So say that you were given functions to solve for the outer parts of the squeeze theorem to find an inner function's limit. If I were to solve those functions and get different answers, then simply put, I cannot use the squeeze theorem to find the limit. All right, congratulations. We've now finished with the limits part of the video and are moving on to the continuity part. So the basic definition that teachers give for continuity is that a graph is continuous if you can with your pencil trace the entire graph without having to lift it. Meaning there is no breaks, jumps or holes. First let's talk about the three types of discontinuities. They are removable discontinuity which is just holes, vertical asmtote discontinuity and jump discontinuity. I think holes and vertical asmmptotes are pretty simple for you to remember how to find. They mostly will all come from rational functions. Holes happen when you cancel something out. And vertical asmmptotes happen when functions are in the denominator that don't cancel out. Vertical asmmptotes can also appear in tangent functions if you remember. And if you want to know how to calculate them, go watch my pre-calculus video link in the description. And finally, a jump discontinuity is actually pretty simple. This is what it looks like on a graph. Notice how one function jumps to the other one. The way to find this in a peiewise equation is by plugging in the values in the inequalities. And if they don't match, there is a jump discontinuity. Now I want to describe the math definition for continuity at one point. Three things have to be true for one point to be continuous at the point x= c. f of c has to be defined. The limit as x approaches c of f ofx has to exist. And the limit as x approaches c of f ofx has to equal f of c. Let's try an example. This peace-wise function is it continuous at c= 1. First of all, let's see if f of one is defined. Yes, it is because it would equal one. Okay. Next, let's check the second one. The limit as x approaches one. The way we do this is by finding the left and right limits. As x approaches one from the right side, we would plug in one for this function and simplifying we'd get one. Then for the left limit, we simplify this function and also get one. Because those two match, the limit does in fact exist. Okay, so for the third one, now we need to see if the limit is equal to f of 1. And yes, it is because f of 1 is equal to 1. So yes, this function is continuous at x= 1. But what if we transition to finding continuity over an interval instead of just at one point? This is where you kind of parallel it with finding domains of functions. Now, I'm going to trust that you know how to find the domain of most functions as you literally are in calculus. However, I will just offer some friendly advice. Polomial, rational, power, exponential, logarithmic, and trig functions are all continuous in their domain. Just remember that rational and log functions have domain holes because of asmmptotes along with some trig functions. That means if you find the domain of these functions which I hope you already know how to the functions will be continuous with its domain. So that means in most of these questions the answer is simply the domain. The only place this gets muddy is with peacewise functions just like this. Obviously these two functions on their own are polomials which would both have domains and continuities of all real numbers. But let's try something here and plug in one to each function. Oh boy, one is one and one is two. That means there is a jump discontinuity at x= 1. So the way we'd write the intervals where the function is continuous on is by the interval notation we do for domainative infinity to 1 with a union and 1 toative infinity. We don't use brackets anywhere here because we know at the point x= 1 it is discontinuous. Now let's say we have a question like this. Let f be a function defined by fx= x^2 - 1 / x -1. What is the value of f of 1 if x is continuous at x= 1? So your immediate thought here is to expand the numerator, cancel out the xus one and say there is a whole or removable discontinuity and be done and say f of one isn't defined. But that is not what the question asked. The question essentially created a separate realm where the function is continuous at x= 1. So let's just algebra this out. We cancel out the x -1's. Then we plug in one for x in the function and we get 2 is equal to f of 1. And that is our answer. And last but not least, I want to introduce you to a theorem you will likely never use, but the CED forces me to teach. If your function is continuous on the interval A to B, and your target number K is between the two endpoint values f of A and F of B, then the function must have the value of K at least once for some X between A and B. This is known as the intermediate value theorem, and it has three parts to use it. Number one, you must confirm the function is continuous on the interval a to b. Number two, you must make sure that f of a doesn't equal f of b. And number three, you must check that k is between f of a and f of b. If all of those are true, then the number k will exist within the interval a to b. And there it is. This unit is done. Not too hard, right? I hope this course doesn't get too difficult. But whoa, whoa, whoa. Don't click off the video yet. There's a ritual I like to do at the end of most all of my unit review videos on this channel, and that is asking you to watch this video and subscribe to this channel. It is my non- educational channel for when I wish to move away from all this AP stuff. So, please just subscribe for me, man. [Music]
